#####################
Hierarchical analyses
#####################

For a pulsar to emit gravitational waves it must have a time varying mass quadrupole. The strength
of the observed gravitational-wave signal is proportional to the star's mass quadrupole moment
:math:`Q_{22}`, which is related to the star's fiducial ellipticity [1]_. Using gravitational-wave
observations, an individual pulsar's :math:`Q_{22}` can be estimated, resulting in a posterior
probability distribution marginalised over other parameters of the gravitational-wave signal (this
can include the pulsar's distance if a prior on the distance is known). However, a priori, the
underlying distribution of :math:`Q_{22}` (or equivalently ellipticity) for the pulsar population is
unknown. This is where `hierarchical Bayesian analysis
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayesian_hierarchical_modeling>`_ comes in. If you chose a
parameterisable distribution as a prior for the underlying :math:`Q_{22}` distribution, then
posteriors from multiple gravitational-wave pulsar observations can be combined, included those
where no signal is detected, to estimate the parameters (known as `hyperparameters
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hyperparameter>`_) of that distribution [2]_. For observations of
:math:`N` pulsars, the combined data from which is represented by :math:`\mathbf{D}`, and assuming a
prior distribution for :math:`Q_{22}` defined by a set of hyperparameters :math:`\vec{\theta}`,
:math:`p(Q_{22}|\vec{\theta},I)`, then the posterior for :math:`\vec{\theta}` is given by:

.. math::

   p(\vec{\theta}|\mathbf{D}, I) = \left(\prod_{i=1}^N \int^{{Q_{22}}_i} p(\mathbf{d}_i|{Q_{22}}_i,I) p({Q_{22}}_i|\vec{\theta},I) {\textrm d}{Q_{22}}_i\right) p(\vec{\theta}|I),

where :math:`p(\mathbf{d}_i|{Q_{22}}_i,I)` is the marginalised likelihood distribution on
:math:`Q_{22}` for an individual pulsar given it's observations :math:`\mathbf{d}_i`, and
:math:`p(\vec{\theta}|I)` is the prior on the hyperparameters.

The hierarchical module in CWInPy allows the outputs of pulsar :ref:`parameter estimation<Known
pulsar parameter estimation>` for multiple sources to be combined to estimate the hyperparameters of
several different potential :math:`Q_{22}` (or ellipticity) distributions. To do this it is required
that the parameter estimation has been performed using :math:`Q_{22}` when defining the signal
amplitude, rather than :math:`h_0`, and that the distance is either assumed to be precisely known,
or the parameter estimation has included distance within the estimation via the use of a distance
prior.

Evaluating the integral
=======================

Within the CWInPy implementation there are two ways provided of evaluating the integrals in the
equation for :math:`p(\vec{\theta}|\mathbf{D}, I)`.

The first method is to evaluate the integrals numerically. A Gaussian kernel density estimate (KDE)
of the *posterior* distribution :math:`p({Q_{22}}_i|\mathbf{d}_i,I)` is generated for each pulsar,
which is converted back into the required *likelihood* distribution via

.. math::

   p(\mathbf{d}_i|{Q_{22}}_i,I) = \frac{p({Q_{22}}_i|\mathbf{d}_i,I)}{p({Q_{22}}_i|I)} p(\mathbf{d}_i|I)

where :math:`p({Q_{22}}_i|I)` is the prior on :math:`Q_{22}` used during the parameter estimation
and :math:`p(\mathbf{d}_i|I)` is the marginal likelihood given the data for the i\ :sup:`th` pulsar.

The second method uses the fact that the integrals are equivalent to calculating the expectation
value of the prior distribution (see, e.g., [3]_):

.. math::

   \mathrm{E}[p({Q_{22}}_i|\vec{\theta},I)] = \int^{{Q_{22}}_i} p(\mathbf{d}_i|{Q_{22}}_i,I) p({Q_{22}}_i|\vec{\theta},I) {\textrm d}{Q_{22}}_i \approx \frac{1}{M} \sum_{j=1}^M p({Q_{22}}_{i,j}|\vec{\theta},I),

where the term on the right hand side is calculating the mean of the :math:`Q_{22}` distribution
evaluated at the :math:`M` samples from likelihood. In the case that the prior used for
:math:`Q_{22}` during the parameter estimation was not uniform then the
:class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution` class will attempt to recreate likelihood
samples by reweighting the posterior samples. In this case the scaling factor from the marginal
likelihood is not included, however, Bayes factors for different distributions using the same data
still can still be calculated.

.. note::

   Both these methods should be equivalent, but as discussed in [2]_, for the particular case of
   estimating the pulsar mass quadrupole distribution, the "expectation value" method appears to
   suffer from numerical issues. This is particularly prominent for cases where to are no
   significantly detected signals for any pulsar, although it appears to have some effect even when
   strong signals are present (see the example :ref:`below<Sampling the hyperparameters>`). It is
   not yet clear what the cause of the numerical issues is, but it appears to be related to the
   reasonably large dynamic range of possible hyperparameters (spanning several orders of magnitude)
   and the finite sampling of posteriors over that range.

   It is therefore, for the moment, recommended to use the numerically evaluated integral based on
   KDEs of the posteriors.

Available distributions
=======================

The currently allowed distributions are:

 * a mixture model of bounded Gaussian distributions:
   :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.BoundedGaussianDistribution` (where the "bounding" refers to the
   distributions being constrained to positive values as :math:`Q_{22}` must be positive)
 * an exponential distribution: :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.ExponentialDistribution`
 * a power law distribution: :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.PowerLawDistribution`
 * a delta function distribution: :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.DeltaFunctionDistribution`
 * a non-parametric histogram-type distribution :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.HistogramDistribution` (see, e.g., 

The :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution` can use any of the above distributions
to define the distribution on the mass quadrupole to be inferred from a set of individual pulsar
mass quadrupole posteriors.

When creating instances of these distributions via the
:func:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.create_distribution` function the following shorthand names can be used:

* ``"gaussian"`` for the :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.BoundedGaussianDistribution`
* ``"exponential"`` for the :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.ExponentialDistribution`
* ``"powerlaw"`` for the :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.PowerLawDistribution`
* ``"deltafunction"`` for the :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.DeltaFunctionDistribution`
* ``"histogram"`` for the :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.HistogramDistribution`

with the required hyperparameters as given by :data:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.DISTRIBUTION_REQUIREMENTS`.
These names can also be used for the ``distribution`` argument of
:class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution`.

Example
=======

In this example we will use the :ref:`simulation<Pulsar simulations>` module to generate a set of
pulsars with mass quadrupoles drawn from an `exponential distribution
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Exponential_distribution>`_ and then show how the mean of that
exponential distribution can be estimated.

The code below will generate a HTCondor DAG that will simulate 100 pulsars with :math:`Q_{22}`
values drawn from an exponential distribution with a mean of :math:`\mu = 10^{30}\,
{\textrm{kg}}\,{\textrm m}^2`. The pulsars' sky locations will be drawn uniformly over the sky and
from the default uniform distance distribution. The orientations of the pulsars will also be drawn
from the default uniform distributions, which are described in the
:class:`~cwinpy.pe.simulation.PEPulsarSimulationDAG` documentation. The simulation will only
generate observations from a single gravitational-wave detector, the LIGO Hanford detector ("H1"),
in this case.

The parameter estimation performed on each of these pulsars will use a uniform prior on
:math:`Q_{22}`, a uniform prior over the orientation parameters (within the non-degenerate ranges),
and will assume the distance to each is precisely know and equal to the simulated value.

.. code-block:: python

   from cwinpy.pe.simulation import PEPulsarSimulationDAG
   from bilby.core.prior import PriorDict, Uniform, Exponential, Sine

   # set the Q22 distribution
   mean = 1e30
   q22dist = Exponential(name="q22", mu=mean)

   # set the prior for each pulsar
   prior = PriorDict({
       "q22": Uniform(0.0, 1e38, name="q22"),
       "iota": Sine(name="iota"),
       "phi0": Uniform(0.0, np.pi, name="phi0"),
       "psi": Uniform(0.0, np.pi / 2, name="psi"),
   })

   # set the detector
   detectors = ["H1"]

   npulsars = 100  # number of pulsars to simulate

   # generate and submit the simulation DAG
   run = PEPulsarSimulationDAG(
       ampdist=ampdist,
       prior=prior,
       npulsars=npulsars, 
       detector=detectors,
       basedir="/home/user/exponential",  # base directory for analysis output
       submit=True,  # automatically submit the HTCondor DAG
       numba=True,   # use numba for likelihood evaluation
       sampler_kwargs={'Nlive': 1000, 'sample': 'rwalk'},
   )

.. note::

   If running on `LSC DataGrid computing resources
   <https://computing.docs.ligo.org/lscdatagridweb/>`_ the ``accountuser`` argument may be required
   to set the HTCondor ``accounting_group_user`` variable to your ``albert.einstein@ligo.org``
   username, and ``accountgroup`` may be required to set the ``accounting_group`` variable to a
   valid `accounting tag <https://accounting.ligo.org/user>`_. You may also need to run
   ``ligo-proxy-init -p albert.einstein`` prior to submitting the HTCondor DAG that is generated.

Once the parameter estimation jobs have completed there should be a ``results`` directory within the
directory specified by the ``basedir`` argument to
:class:`~cwinpy.pe.simulation.PEPulsarSimulationDAG`, which contains the results from each pulsar in
the simulation. These can be combined to infer the hyperparameter of the :math:`Q_{22}`
distribution. Here we show how to do this using both methods of evaluating the marginalisation
integrals described :ref:`above<Evaluating the integral>`, and estimating the posterior on the
hyperparameters using both stochastic sampling (in this case using the nested sampling algorithm
implemented in dynesty) and over a grid of points. The former methods is maybe over-the-top for this
single dimensional example, but does have the advantage that the range and resolution of the
required grid does not need to be known a priori.

Sampling the hyperparameters
============================

To start with, the results for each pulsar need to be read in. This can be done using a bilby
:class:`~bilby.core.result.ResultList` object using (assuming the base directory given above):

.. code-block:: python

   import glob
   from bilby.core.result import ResultList

   # get a list of result files
   resultfiles = glob.glob("/home/user/exponential/results/J*/*.json")
   
   # read in as list of bilby Result objects
   data = ResultList(resultfiles)

Then a :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution` needs to be set up and provided with
the type of distribution for which the hyperparameters will be estimated, the priors on those
hyperparameters, the method of :ref:`evaluating the integrals<Evaluating the integral>`, and any
arguments required for the stochastic or grid-based sampling method. In this case the distribution
is an exponential, and we will use a :class:`~bilby.core.prior.analytical.HalfNormal` prior (a
Gaussian distribution with a mode a zero, but excluding negative values) for the hyperparameter
:math:`\mu`, with a scale parameter :math:`\sigma = 10^{34}\,{\textrm{kg}}\,{\textrm m}^2` roughly
based on the largest sustainable quadrupole deformations as described in [1]_.

The first example below uses the integral evaluation method that performs the integrals over
:math:`Q_{22}` numerically with the trapezium rule, which requires the ``"numerical"`` argument, and
uses the default nested sampling routine to draw the samples from :math:`\mu`.

.. code-block:: python

   # set the distribution type
   distribution = "exponential"
   
   # set the hyperparameter prior distribution using a dictionary
   sigma = 1e34
   distkwargs = {"mu": HalfNormal(sigma, name="mu")}

   # integration method
   intmethod = "numerical"  # use the numerical trapezium rule integration over Q22

   # set the sampler keyword arguments
   sampler_kwargs = {
       "nlive": 500,
       "gzip": True,
       "outdir": "exponential_distribution",
       "label": intmethod,
       "check_point_plot": False,
   }

   # create the MassQuadrupoleDistribution object
   mqd = MassQuadrupoleDistribution(
       data=data,
       distribution="exponential",
       distkwargs=distkwargs,
       sampler_kwargs=sampler_kwargs,
       integration_method=intmethod,
       nsamples=500,  # number of Q22 samples to store/use
   )

   # run the sampler
   res = mqd.sample(sample="unif")

The ``res`` value returned by :meth:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution.sample` will be
a :class:`~bilby.core.result.Result` object containing the posterior samples for :math:`\mu`.

.. note::

   If you have a very large number of pulsars it may not be memory efficient to read them all in in
   one go to a :class:`~bilby.core.result.ResultList` object. They can instead be passed one at a
   time to the :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution`, using the
   :meth:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution.add_data` method, e.g.:

   .. code-block:: python

      resultfiles = glob.glob("/home/user/exponential/results/J*/*.json")

      mqd = MassQuadrupoleDistribution(
          data=resultfiles[0],  # add first file
          distribution="exponential",
          distkwargs=distkwargs,
          sampler_kwargs=sampler_kwargs,
          integration_method=intmethod,
          nsamples=500,
      )
      
      # add in the rest of the data files
      for resfile in resultfiles[1:]:
          mqd.add_data(resfile)

To instead use the method of approximating the integrals over :math:`Q_{22}` using the expectation
value of the distribution, the ``integration_method`` argument would be set of ``"expectation"``.

Rather than stochastically drawing samples from the :math:`\mu` posterior distribution, one can
instead evaluate the distribution on a grid. To do this the ``grid`` keyword argument can be used to
pass a dictionary, keyed on the hyperparameter names and with values giving the grid points, e.g.,:

.. code-block:: python

   # set the grid on mu (in logspace)
   muvalues = np.logspace(np.log10(1e27), np.log10(5e34), 1000)
   muvalues = np.insert(muvalues, 0, 0)  # let's add in a point at zero
   grid = {"mu": muvalues}

   mqd = MassQuadrupoleDistribution(
       data=resultfiles[0],  # add first file
       distribution="exponential",
       distkwargs=distkwargs,
       integration_method=intmethod,
       grid=grid,
   )

   # evaluate on the grid
   resgrid = mqd.sample()

   # get posterior from grid
   postgrid = np.exp(resgrid.ln_posterior - resgrid.ln_posterior.max())
   postgrid = postgrid / np.trapz(postgrid, muvalues)

In this case the ``resgrid`` value returned by
:meth:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.MassQuadrupoleDistribution.sample` will be a
:class:`~bilby.core.grid.Grid` object.

For comparison, we can plot the results from these different methods as below (assuming the
:class:`~bilby.core.result.Result` output of using the "expectation value" method is stored in
``res2``):

.. code-block::

   from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
   from matplotlib import rc

   # set fonts
   rc("mathtext", **{"fontset": "stix"})
   rc("font", **{"family": "STIXGeneral"})

   # plot posteriors on the exponential distribution hyperparameter mu
   fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(8,6))
   scale = 1e30  # scale values so histogram works with density=True argument
   truth = 1e30  # the known simulation values of mu
   ax.hist(  # posterior using "numerical" method
       res.posterior["mu"] / scale,
       density=True,
       histtype="stepfilled",
       alpha=0.5,
       color="blue",
       bins=25,
       label="\"numerical\"",
   )
   ax.hist(  # posterior using "expectation value" method
       res2.posterior["mu"] / scale,
       density=True,
       histtype="stepfilled",
       alpha=0.5,
       color="orange",
       bins=25,
       label="\"expectation\"",
   )

   # over plot the distribution as evaluated on a grid
   ax.plot(muvalues / scale, postgrid * scale, "darkblue", label="grid")

   # add a line showing the "truth"
   ax.axvline(truth / scale, color="k", ls="--", lw=2, label="true $\mu$")

   ax.set_xlim([0, 4])
   ax.set_xlabel(r"$\mu$ ($10^{30}\,{\rm kg}\,{\rm m}^2$)", fontsize=18);
   ax.set_ylabel(r"$p(\mu|\mathbf{D}, I)$ ($10^{-30}\,{\rm kg}^{-1}\,{\rm m}^{-2}$)", fontsize=18);

   # set axis label font size
   for item in ax.get_xticklabels() + ax.get_yticklabels():
       item.set_fontsize(14)

   # add legends
   leg1 = plt.legend(
       handles=ax.get_legend_handles_labels()[0][2:],
       title="Integration method",
       fontsize=14,
       title_fontsize=15,
       loc="upper right",
   )
   leg2 = plt.legend(
       ax.get_lines()[0:2],
       ax.get_legend_handles_labels()[1][0:2],
       loc="lower right",
       fontsize=14,
   )
   ax.add_artist(leg1)
   ax.add_artist(leg2)
   fig.tight_layout()
   fig.savefig("muposterior.png", dpi=200)

.. thumbnail:: images/muposterior.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

It is interesting to look at the distribution of the signal-to-noise ratios of the simulation versus
the recovered maximum a-posteriori signal to noise ratios. Another informative plot is a posterior
predictive plot that checks the recovered exponential distribution matches the simulated
distribution of :math:`Q_{22}` values. Both these are shown below.

.. code-block:: python

   from bilby.core.prior import Exponential
   from cwinpy import PulsarParameters
   import glob
   import json
   from matplotlib import pyplot as plt
   from matplotlib import rc

   # true mu value
   truth = 1e30
   scale = 1e30 # scale values so histogram works with density=True argument

   # load in SNRs
   snrfiles = glob.glob("/home/user/exponential/results/J*/*snr")
   injsnrs = []
   recsnrs = []
   for sf in snrfiles:
       with open(sf, "r") as fp:
           d = json.load(fp)
       injsnrs.append(d["Injected SNR"])
       recsnrs.append(d["Maximum a-posteriori SNR"])

   # load in simulation pulsar parameters and extract Q22 values
   pulsarfiles = glob.glob("/home/user/exponential/pulsars/*.par")
   trueq22 = np.array([PulsarParameters(pf)["Q22"] for pf in pulsarfiles])

   # create plot
   rc("mathtext", **{"fontset": "stix"})
   rc("font", **{"family": "STIXGeneral"})
   rc("font", **{"size": 16})
   fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(12, 6))

   # plot true SNR vs recovered SNR
   ax[0].plot(injsnrs, recsnrs, "bo", markersize=10, alpha=0.5)
   ax[0].set_xscale("log")
   ax[0].set_yscale("log")
   ax[0].set_xlabel("Injected SNR", fontsize=16);
   ax[0].set_ylabel("Maximum a-posteriori SNR", fontsize=16);

   # plot posterior predictive
   nsamples = 500  # get 500 samples to use for posterior predictive plot
   q22values = np.logspace(28, np.log10(2 * np.max(trueq22)), 10000)

   for pdf in mqd.posterior_predictive(q22values, nsamples=nsamples):
       ax[1].plot(q22values / scale, pdf * scale, color="orange", alpha=0.05)
   ax[1].plot(  # add "true" distribution 
       q22values / scale,
       Exponential(mu=truth / scale, name="mu").prob(q22values / scale),
       color='k',
       lw=2,
       ls="--",
   )

   # add histogram and rug plot of simulated Q22 values
   ax[1].plot(trueq22 / scale, np.zeros_like(trueq22), '|', color='k', ms=15, alpha=0.5)
   ax[1].hist(trueq22 / scale, bins=15, histtype="step", density=True)
   ax[1].set_xlim([0, q22values.max() / scale])
   ax[1].set_xlabel(r"$Q_{22}$ ($10^{30}\,{\rm kg}\,{\rm m}^2$)", fontsize=16)
   ax[1].set_ylabel(r"$p(Q_{22}|\mathbf{D}, I)$", fontsize=16)
   ax[1].set_title("Posterior predictive check", fontsize=17)

   fig.tight_layout()
   fig.savefig("muposteriorpredictive.png", dpi=200)

.. thumbnail:: images/muposteriorpredictive.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

It can be seen that the recovered exponential distributions agree well with the true distribution of
:math:`Q_{22}` values generated in the simulation.

Model comparison
================

We can estimate the hyperparameters of a different distribution based on the same simulated pulsar
population. From this we can use the calculated marginal likelihoods for the two distributions to
compare which distribution fits the data best.

Below, we use chose to try and fit another simple distribution with a single hyperparameter, a
:class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.BoundedGaussianDistribution` distribution. This distribution can be
used to fit a mixture model of Gaussians to the data (bounded at zero, so that only positive values
are allowed), but here we will just assume a single mode. The peak of the mode will be fixed at zero
and the width, :math:`\sigma`, will be given a :class:`~bilby.core.prior.analytical.HalfNormal`
prior with the same scale of :math:`\sigma = 10^{34}\,{\textrm{kg}}\,{\textrm m}^2` as used for
:math:`\mu` previously.

.. note::

   Within a :class:`~cwinpy.hierarchical.BoundedGaussianDistribution` the distribution modes will be
   held as parameters called ``muX``, the widths will be held as parameters called ``sigmaX``, and
   the mode weights will be held as parameters called ``weightX``, where ``X`` will be an index for
   the mode starting at zero. E.g., for a distribution defined with a single mode, the parameters
   held will be ``mu0``, ``sigma0`` and ``weight0``.

.. code-block:: python

   # set up a Gaussian distribution (bounded at zero) with one mode at zero and
   # a width to be fitted using sigma
   sigma = 1e34
   distkwargs = {
       "mus": [0],  # fix the peak of the single mode at zero
       "sigmas": [HalfNormal(sigma, name="sigma")],  # set prior on width of the mode
       "weights": [1],
   }
   distribution = "gaussian"  # the keyword to use a bounded Gaussian distribution
   sampler_kwargs = {
       "sample": "unif",
       "nlive": 500,
       "gzip": True,
       "outdir": "gaussian_distribution",
       "label": "test",
       "check_point_plot": False,
   }
   bins = 500
   mqdgauss = MassQuadrupoleDistribution(
       data=data,
       distribution=distribution,
       distkwargs=distkwargs,
       bins=bins,
      sampler_kwargs=sampler_kwargs,
   )

   # sample from the sigma hyperparameters
   resgauss = mqdgauss.sample()

We can get the `Bayes factor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayes_factor>`_ between the two
distributions with:

.. code-block:: python

   # get the base-10 log Bayes factor between the two models (exponential
   # distribution as the numerator and Gaussian as the denominator
   bayesfactor = res.log_10_evidence - resgauss.log_10_evidence

In this case the ``bayesfactor`` value is -0.75, i.e., the bounded Gaussian distribution is actually
favoured over the (true) exponential distribution by a factor of :math:`10^{0.75} = 5.6`! A Bayes
factor of ~6 is not `convincing evidence
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bayes_factor#Interpretation>`_ to favour one model over the other,
but it shows that in some cases it can be tricky to distinguish between distributions.

We can plot the posterior distributions for the hyperparameters from the exponential and Gaussian
distributions side-by-side:

.. code-block:: python

   # plot posteriors on the exponential distribution hyperparameter mu
   fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(12, 6))
   scale = 1e30  # scale values so histogram works with density=True argument

   # plot mu from exponential distribution
   ax[0].hist(
       res.posterior["mu"] / scale,
       density=True,
       histtype="stepfilled",
       alpha=0.5, color="blue",
       bins=25,
   )

   # plot sigma from gaussian distribution
   ax[1].hist(
       resgauss.posterior["sigma0"] / scale,
       density=True,
       histtype="stepfilled",
       alpha=0.5, color="purple",
       bins=25,
   )

   ax[0].set_xlim([0, 4])
   ax[0].set_xlabel(r"$\mu$ ($10^{30}\,{\rm kg}\,{\rm m}^2$)", fontsize=18)
   ax[0].set_ylabel(r"$p(\mu|\mathbf{D}, I)$ ($10^{-30}\,{\rm kg}^{-1}\,{\rm m}^{-2}$)", fontsize=18)
   ax[0].set_title("Exponential distribution")

   ax[1].set_xlim([0, 4])
   ax[1].set_xlabel(r"$\sigma_0$ ($10^{30}\,{\rm kg}\,{\rm m}^2$)", fontsize=18)
   ax[1].set_ylabel(r"$p(\sigma_0|\mathbf{D}, I)$ ($10^{-30}\,{\rm kg}^{-1}\,{\rm m}^{-2}$)", fontsize=18)
   ax[1].set_title("Bounded Gaussian distribution")

   fig.tight_layout()
   fig.savefig("musigmaposterior.png", dpi=200)

.. thumbnail:: images/musigmaposterior.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

The trickiness of distinguishing the distributions in this case is highlighted using the posterior
predictive plots:

.. code-block:: python

   fig, ax = plt.subplots(1, 2, figsize=(12, 6), sharey=True)

   # plot posterior predictive for exponential distribution
   nsamples = 500  # get 500 samples to use for posterior predictive plot
   q22values = np.logspace(28, np.log10(2 * np.max(trueq22)), 10000)

   scale = 1e30  # scale values so histogram works with density=True argument
   for pdf in mqd.posterior_predictive(q22values, nsamples=nsamples):
       ax[0].plot(q22values / scale, pdf * scale, color="orange", alpha=0.05)
   ax[0].plot(  # add "true" distribution 
       q22values / scale,
       Exponential(mu=truth / scale, name="mu").prob(q22values / scale),
       color='k',
       lw=2,
       ls="--",
   )

   # add histogram and rug plot of simulated Q22 values
   ax[0].plot(trueq22 / scale, np.zeros_like(trueq22), '|', color='k', ms=15, alpha=0.5)
   ax[0].hist(trueq22 / scale, bins=15, histtype="step", density=True)
   ax[0].set_xlim([0, q22values.max() / scale])
   ax[0].set_xlabel(r"$Q_{22}$ ($10^{30}\,{\rm kg}\,{\rm m}^2$)", fontsize=16)
   ax[0].set_ylabel(r"$p(Q_{22}|\mathbf{D}, I)$", fontsize=16)
   ax[0].set_title("Exponential distribution", fontsize=17)

   # plot posterior predictive for bounded Gaussian distribution
   for pdf in mqdgauss.posterior_predictive(q22values, nsamples=nsamples):
       ax[1].plot(q22values / scale, pdf * scale, color="red", alpha=0.05)
   ax[1].plot(  # add "true" distribution 
       q22values / scale,
       Exponential(mu=truth / scale, name="mu").prob(q22values / scale),
       color='k',
       lw=2,
       ls="--",
   )

   # add histogram and rug plot of simulated Q22 values
   ax[1].plot(trueq22 / scale, np.zeros_like(trueq22), '|', color='k', ms=15, alpha=0.5)
   ax[1].hist(trueq22 / scale, bins=15, histtype="step", density=True)
   ax[1].set_xlim([0, q22values.max() / scale])
   ax[1].set_xlabel(r"$Q_{22}$ ($10^{30}\,{\rm kg}\,{\rm m}^2$)", fontsize=16)
   ax[1].set_title("Bounded Gaussian distribution", fontsize=17)

   fig.tight_layout()
   fig.savefig("musigmaposteriorpredictive.png", dpi=200)

.. thumbnail:: images/musigmaposteriorpredictive.png
   :width: 600px
   :align: center

We can see that both models do a reasonable job at recovering the simulated distribution.

Hierarchical module API
=======================

.. automodule:: cwinpy.hierarchical
   :members:

Hierarchical analysis references
================================

.. [1] `N. K. Johnson-McDaniel & B. J. Owen
   <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2013PhRvD..88d4004J/abstract>`_, *PRD*,
   **88**, 044004 (2013).
.. [2] `M. Pitkin, C. Messenger & X. Fan
   <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2018PhRvD..98f3001P/abstract>`_, *PRD*,
   **98**, 063001 (2018).
.. [3] `D. W. Hogg, A. D. Myers & J. Bovy
   <https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010ApJ...725.2166H/abstract>`_, *ApJ*,
   **725**,  2166-2175 (2010).
